In this lecture, you'll learn about layer 3 etherchannels. In the earlier lectures in this section,
you saw how to configure layer 2 etherchannels.
We can configure layer 3 etherchannels as well.
You can see that with the configuration example here. And the configuration is actually exactly the same.
The only difference is that we make the ports a layer 3 port with the no switchport command.
So that's a standard command you can use on a layer 3 switch whenever you're using etherchannel
or not to say that the port is a layer 3 port so that you can put an IP address on there.
So let's look at the configuration. So at global config, I've said interface range
gi1/0/1 - 2
And then I say no switchport to make those layer 3 ports and then I'm going to configure them
as a port channel.
So I say channel-group 1 mode and then the same options as we had for layer 2.
It can be active, auto, desirable, on, or passive, depending on whenever you want to make it
a static etherchannel with on,
or we can use active or passive for LACP or we can use auto or desirable for PaGP.
So that will group the ports together into an etherchannel. We can then put our other configuration
on our etherchannel.
That's where we're going to put our IP address.
So we say interface port-channel 1, the one ties up with the channel group number.
And then in this example, we'd say ip address 192.168.0.1
255.255.255.252.
And remember to do a no shutdown on the interface.
OK, so that is a layer 3 etherchannel. That's the complete config.
So this could have been a really short lecture, but there's another implication of this. Something else I
want to talk to you about here, and that is the network design.
So looking at our traditional campus design with the core distribution and access layer. And the way
that this would be done originally would be there would be layer 2 links between the access layer
switches and the distribution layer switches.
And the default gateway for the end hosts would be on the distribution layer switches and we would have
spanning-tree running between the access and the distribution layer because they are layer 2 links.
Well, a trend that you can see increasingly now is actually putting layer 3 links in everywhere.
And the benefit you get from doing that is it means that you're not using spanning-tree anymore.
Spanning-tree is a necessary evil.
The bad side of spanning-tree is that it tends to shutdown half of your links and it's also very
slow to recover from failure as well.
So it's bad, but it still does good things.
You still need it because it would be way worse if you had a layer 2 loop in your network, because
that would just basically bring your network down.
So we make sure that we don't have layer 2 loops by having spanning-tree enabled.
But the bad side is that it's slow to recover from failures and it does shutdown half of our links.
So it would be better if we could have layer 3 links everywhere and not use spanning-tree anymore, right?
Now, you may be wondering, well, OK, well, why didn't we always do that?
Why did we used to have layer 2 links between the access layer and the distribution layer?
Now, in a lot of modern networks
we still do have layer 2 links from the access to the distribution layer.
But an increasing trend that you'll see now is that layer 3 is everywhere
andd the reason it's possible is that layer 3 switches have come down in price a lot.
Back in the day, layer 3 switches were a lot more expensive than layer 2 switches.
And your access layer switches where you had a high port count, where you had all of your hosts plugged
in,
so you had a lot of access layer switches and it just wasn't possible from a cost point of view to
layer 3 switches in on all your access layer switches.
But because time has moved on now and the prices have come down for layer 3 switches, it is more
feasible to do that now.
So if you do put in layer 3 switches everywhere, including in the access layer, now you actually
have the layer 3 links from the access layer to the distribution layer. Meaning you've got an IP address
on this port here and an IP address on this port here.
So because everything is layer 3, you don't have spanning-tree running anymore. Spanning-tree
only works on layer 2 links.
So the way that you do have the paths being determined between your switches is not being determined
by spanning-tree anymore.
It's being determined by your routing protocol.
So when you're using layer 3 links everywhere, you will configure a routing protocol on here
as well,
and it's up to the routing protocol to handle the path determination. With your routing protocols, they
support equal cost load balancing, so you're not going to have links being shutdown.
All your links will still be available and traffic will be load balanced across all of them.
Also, your routing protocols recover from failures.
They converge a lot faster than spanning-tree does.
So that's a benefit you get there. Now, when you do this, last thing I will tell you about it, is that the default gateway
is not going to be on the distribution layer switches now as it would be with layer 2.
On the access layer, the default gateway for your end host is going to be on the access layer switches.
And if you think about it, it has to be because we're going to have an IP subnet down here and we're
going to have a different IP subnet here. And the default gateway for your hosts has to be in the same
IP subnet.
So your default gateway is now going to be configured on your access layer switches and you're going to
have routing everywhere,
layer 3 links everywhere above that.
OK.
Oh, and I've put this in the etherchannel lecture because very often when you're doing that, you
are going to have etherchannels going up between your switches and when you've got layer 3 everywhere,
of course, there are going to be layer 3 etherchannels.
OK, that's everything I needed to tell you
here. See you in the next lecture.